
Maral Kojayan MA
January 2014

# New Tango, A Brief Overview

## How new is ‘tango nuevo’?

New tango has existed ever since Gloria & Eduardo were a young couple dancing in the milongas of Buenos  Aires.  Don't take my word for it, ask  Eduardo & Gloria.  Eduardo Arquimbau, now in his 70s and considered a great maestro milonguero, describes in an informal  interview, how  the  dance  has  changed  with  every  new  generation  as  they practised  and  improvised; He  explains  how  in  the  1940s  when  tango  became  hugely popular  with  the  youth  of  Buenos  Aires  and  shorter  skirts  became all  the  rage with  the young  ladies,  new  possibilities  became  available  and  new  steps  emerged  from  the inventive  imaginations  and ‘energetic  bodies of  the young’. Elements  like  voleos, ganchos, sacadas, entradas and more all came about in the 40s. The 50s had their own novelty, as youngsters developed more intimate interests; girls started going out without their mothers as chaperones and the liberation from parental supervision led to dancing in  a  much  closer  embrace ...  It's  interesting  that  as  these  genuine  'viejo  milongueros' describe how tango has evolved in their time, they help contextualise the most recent of new  tango  movements,  because  they  clearly  portray a  history  where,together  with socio-political  conditions,  the  curiosity,  creativity  and  energy  of  the  youth has always been  the  driving  force  for  change  in tango.  That  every  decade  with  a  large  enough population  of  young tango dancers  has  led  to  new  developments  in  the  dance,and  as Eduardo puts it, so-called ‘tango nuevo’is no exception.

Between  1955  and  1982,  for  a  number  of  socio-political  reasons[1](ref1),  tango became increasingly  a less  attractive pastime in Buenos Aires. However, the end of the military dictatorship  in  1982, and  the  popularity  of  the  show  ‘Tango  Argentino’ in the  cultural capitals  of Europe and  on  Broadway, brought tangoback  into  fashion  with  the  young well-to-do  of  Buenos  Aires  and  more  and  more  young  people became enticed by  the tango.  By this time however, there was a pronounced generation gap between the old and new dancers; the only people left dancing from the last boom years (the Golden Era youngsters)  were, by the  80s, the  'viejo  milongueros'  (old  milonga  goers).   Eduardo recalls  how  the new  young  dancers were curious  about the  dance  of  the 'viejo milongueros' but of course, the dance they picked up from them would not look the same, owing  to their  more supple bodies  and distinct  energies[2](ref2),  as  well  as  the  fact  that  times had simply moved on.

Thus  by  the  90s  the  last  wave  of  novelties  were  well  in  bloom  and  for  better  or worse become labelled as ‘tango nuevo’.  What's interesting to note is that the much-loved film and one that raised Argentine tango's profile right across the world -- Sally Potter’s The Tango  Lesson (1997) -- starred three young dancers  from  the  younger  generation  who (together  with  a  small  handful  of  others) are  considered the founders  of ‘tango  nuevo’ that is to say, the new wave of tango.  The irony is that whilst most tango dancers speak so  fondly  of The  Tango  Lesson,  they  may  well pooh-pooh ‘tango  nuevo’ in  the  same sentence  without realising that  they  are  speaking about  the different works of  the  very same people.

## What's new about the latest new tango?

Without the historical and anthropological perspective, it is easy to fail to appreciate what ‘tango nuevo’ really is and how it persists in 'traditional' disguise today.

’Tango nuevo’is  often  limited  to  being  considered  a  'style'[3](ref3), misconstrued as being simply about opening the embrace (sometimes thought synonymous to ‘open embrace’) or confused with tango danced to alternative music[4](ref4). However, fundamentally, it is none of  the  above and  unfortunately, these  sorts  of  simplifications  create  a  great  deal  of misunderstanding  and  lead  to  an  almost  irreparable  distortion  of the  history  of  tango, especially as it depends largely on oral transmission.

Those  who  have  spent  time  studying  the  dance  would  be  much  more  inclined  to describe‘tango nuevo’as a method of study and analysis.  Gustavo Naveira, one of the main actors in the new movement of tango (and one of the three men from The Tango Lesson), states in his essay on New Tango(2008)[5](ref5):

> “In  reality, tango  nuevois  everything  that  has  happened  with  the  tango since the 1980s ... The wordstango nuevoexpress what is happening with tango  dancing  in  general;  namely  that  it  is  evolving. Tango  nuevois  not one  more  style;  it  is  simply  that  tango  dancing  is  growing,  improving, developing,  enriching  itself,  and  in  that  sense  we  are  moving  toward  a new dimension in tango dancing ... The result of this is a dance of greater possibilities, and also of a much more artistic quality.”

In  line  with  Naveira’s  words,  I  would  add that the  new  wave  of  tango  brought  greater self-awareness  to  the  dance as  a  dance form.  Hence  it raised  the  demands on  the dancer,  requiring  an  increased  awareness and  understanding.  With this  increased awareness, techniques were developed as well as greater structural understanding. In this  sense,  regardless  of  ‘style’  any  discussion  of  ‘technique’,  that  is  to  say,  any examination  of  ‘how  to’,  is  all  part  of  the ‘tango  nuevo’ movement. Unfortunately,  this ‘evolution’,  the  most  natural  of  processes,  is  not  always  appreciated  and  understood within its proper context when it comes to tango. I doubt many today would accuse The Royal  Ballet of diminishing  the  tradition of ballet or of causing the  loss  of  emotional expression, simply because of its emphasis on study, on an intellectual understanding of the physics of the dance and on technical skill[6](ref6). So why is ‘tango nuevo’ criticised for thissame process?

## Misunderstood?

One  of  the  main  reasons  that ‘tango  nuevo’ has  had  its  share  of  bad  press  in  recent years  has  been  because  people  who  have  not  yet  developed an  understanding  of  the essence  of  tango,  or developed their  skills  enough  to  controltheir  movements have never the less taken to the dance floor trying to do ambitious or inappropriate movement with  little  connection  to  the  music,  the  limitations  of  the  space  and / or their partner.  Towards  the  end  of  the  first  decade  of  the  new  century,  teachers  such  as  Chicho Frumboli and Sebastian Arce (leaders in the newest generation of ‘tango nuevo’), started to express their feelings of a sense of responsibility for what was starting to take place in the  young  people's  milongas of Buenos  Aires  and around  the  world.   They  started  to question  whether they  had  been  a  little  unwise  in  putting  complicated  tools  into  the hands of students who had not yet learnt the essence of what tango was about and were therefore unable  to  apply  their  limited  knowledge  appropriately.   In an  interview in  the Tangauta[7](ref7),  Chicho  admits  “we  missed  something  in  the  teaching ... I  lost  the  way  to  be able  to  pass  on  the  tango  essence that  I  have  very  much  inside ... there  are  a  lot  of people who don't understand or know what the real essence of this dance is.”

These realisations amongst a handful of influential ‘tango nuevo’ dancers (together with two significant micro and macro socio-economic conditions[8](ref8), led to a visible shift in the younger generation milongas and practicas in Buenos Aires and more significantly in the large  European  tango  cities and festivals. Young teachers and their students started to tend  towards  a  closer  embrace,  to  avoid  too  much  extroversion,  to channel complexity inwards,  to  stop  playing  alternative  music  for  tango  dancing, to  shift  towards  less abstract phrasing etc.  In short there was an active effort to impart what tango was about in  terms  of  a  feeling,  something  that  all  those  who  had  learnt  directly  from  the milonguero sknew intuitively and had it within, but something that was starting to get lost in translation in some sectors of the tango community in Buenos Aires and worldwide[9](ref9).


This  return  to  an  appreciation  of  the  essence  of  tango was  a  very  important  and necessary development in the life of the dance. However the backlash came with a stingas  some  people[10](ref10) started  to  create  rules  about  what  tango  is  and  how  it should be danced[11](ref11). Superficially it  seemed ‘tango  nuevo’ was  ‘out’  and  ‘traditional’  was ‘in’.  However, whilst  the  style  of  dancing  in  the  Palermo  milongas has changed  in  the  past eight yearsor so, ‘tango nuevo’is very much alive in the bodies and minds of the very talented and skilled dancers who started learning and investigating tango in the 80s,90s and the start of the new century.  Some of the very top dancers touring the world today showing and teaching their quite different styles, have all developed out of the process of  new  tango,  the  process  that  led  to  investigation  and  growth  rather  that  learning through memorisation or copying.

## A new phase ...

I’d  say  the  last  few  decades up  until  about  2006 can  be  considered  the development years  of ‘tango  nuevo’, the  period  of discovery.    But  in  the  last  decadeas  the  dancers have  matured,  so have their  dancing  and  teaching.   It’s  important  that  we too  develop and mature our understanding of what ‘tango nuevo’ is, what it has brought to tango and the sophisticated elegance and high level of skill it requires to do it justice.

We have  entereda  new  phase  now; the  new  movement  in  tango brought us  tools  and knowledge and  with  this  comes  new  responsibility  and  an  opportunity  for  personal  and collective  growth.    The  question  for  this  new  phase  is, are  we  going  to  move  towards greater  levels  of mastery  or  are  we  going  to  hide  the tools  for  fear that  they may  kick somebody in the shin?


-----

[ref1] The reasons for the change were complex and not something to discuss in any detail at this point, but very generally put were as a result of the military dictatorships and changes in the  music industry in Argentina.

[ref2] “su  dinámica  y  su  propia  energía  le hace  trabajar  movimientos  que  ellos  mismos  quizás  dentro  deunos años no los podrán hacer”.  From Historia del Baile de Tango (Recopilación de comentarios realizados por Gloria   y   Eduardo   Arquimbau),02   Oct   2012,   Matias   Facio.   (https://www.facebook.com/notes/matias-facio/historia-del-baile-de-tango-recopilaci%C3%B3n-de-comentarios-realizados-por-gloria-y-/10151177607269586)

[ref3] Eduardo would define a 'style' as being a way of dancing (not restricted to one or two couples but a larger phenomenon) that can be differentiated from another style by the external form it takes.

[ref4] ‘Alternative  music’  is  often  a  term  used  to  describe  non-tango  music,  or  music  that  uses  some  tango rhythms mixed with other genres.

[ref5] Tango, A History of Obsession, Virginia Gift, 2008, ISBN 1-4392-1462-X(self published, appeared first in 2009).

[ref6] I would argue emotional expression is not lost once one understands the workings of a movement, in fact ones  capacity  for  expression  can  only  be  enhanced  by  deeper  understanding,  as  long  as  one  is  not consumed by performance anxiety.

[ref7] ‘One on One with Milena Plebs and Chicho Frumboli Interview’, El Tangauta 182, Dec 2009.

[ref8] The change included the growth of more formal and grander tango festivals and events worldwide and the economic  crisis,  which  peaked  in  2008  worldwide,  both  of  which  have  led  to  a  tendency  for  more conservative behaviour.

[ref9] It’s  important  to  note  that  the  many  newly  spouting  tango  communities  in  Europe  and  the  USA  have needed time to mature, to be ready to go into subtleties. Anyone who teaches absolute beginners knows the limitations of a new dancer.  Only a few layers of information can be processed at any one time.  One can’t ask a beginner or improver dancer to focus on the music, the emotion, the connection, improvisation, their posture, their partner’s axis, the distance in the embrace, the direction of movement and the size of step all at the same time.  I would even argue that most professional dancers can’t consciously focus on all these things at the same time, though over time they learn to automatize enough to free their mind to be present in the  moment.    As  dancers  improve  they  can  focus  on  processing  several  layers  simultaneously,  and  the same  can  be  said  for  a  community  of  dancers.  And  whilst  with  the  beginner,  there  is  one  type  of responsibility,  as  the  dance  becomes  more  complex  there  is  another  responsibility  on  teachers  to  produce well-balanced  dancers,  ones  who  understand  structure  and  technique,  connection,  rhythm,  the  emotion imparted  in  the  music  and  lyrics  and  how  to  expressthemselves  through  the  body.    In  short  the  whole grammar, vocabulary, elocution, poetry, metaphor and history of the language that is tango.

[ref10] Often people with a limited knowledge and understanding of the process and development of tango in the last decades and often also people with a limited knowledge of what it means to be a ‘milonguero’.

[ref11] This  has  been  an  unfortunate  turn  of  events,  because  they  seem  to  have  forgotten  that  tango  is  about expression, the self-expression of each dancer, expression of the complex music as he/she feels it, that at the very heart of it it’s about improvisation and about developing an internal and personal intelligence to flow skilfully  with  a  partner  in  space  to  music.    In  this  sense,  it’s  certainly  not  about  rules.    There  are  some conventions  to  lubricate  the  social  space,  but  these  conventions  for  the  most  part  have  developed  out  of necessity  and  common  sense  and  the  applications  of  these  conventions  can  even  be  milonga-specific. These social conventions in themselves, like the dance, are a skill and an art form and neither can be taught like the times tables!

